README.md, before:

[UNDER CONSTRUCTION]


# Selenium WebDriver BiDi (WD BiDi) - BlackOps-Flavored Codified DevTools - Kismet Child of WebDriver Classic (WD Classic) and Chrome DevTools Protocol (CDP)

### Evolution of WD Classic
### Evolution of CDP
### WD Classic vs CDP
### WD BiDi and Its Advantages
### WD BiDi Implementation Status
### BiDi API Code Samples

----

### Evolution of WD Classic

WD Classic was created in 2005. It's been a 18+ year long journey.

#### WD Classic - History:

2004 -- Selenium RC
- Jason Huggins introduces the fist automation tool in 2004. RC worked by installing a remote control server in the browser machines. It sent a command to a JS engine called Selenium Core. And the Selenium Core, residing in the browser engine, executed that command. RC used to be quite popular, but came to a disadvantage because of its complex architecture. Moreover, its API was not purely object oriented.

2005 -- WebDriver
- Simon Stewart introduces the WedDriver protocol in 2005. The driver communicates to browsers via JSON wire protocol WD API.

2009 -- Selenium WebDriver
- Selenium and WebDriver merge into a new tool called Selenium WebDriver. JSON wire protocol is still used to communicate with the browsers.

2018 -- WD becomes a W3C standard
- W3C makes WD a standard specification. Now, Selenium WD communicates with the browsers via the W3C protocol, not JSON wire. Selenium v4 and other tools that use WD communicate via W3C protocol.
- The protocol was introduced to provide consistency and stability for test cases when using the WD.

#### WD Classic - Automation Tools:
- Selenium WD
    - Open-source suite of tools (ecosystem) for automating web apps.
    - Used for testing and simulating user interactions in the browsers.
- WebDriverIO
    - A test automation tool for web apps.
    - Offers a simple syntax and built-in commands.
    - Supports multiple browsers and devices for efficient and effective testing.
- NightWatchJS
    - An automated testing tool based on Node.js.
    - Offers a simple syntax and built-in WD support.
    - Supports E2E testing and browser automation.
- Appium
    - Open-source ecosystem for mobile automation.
    - Allows testing of native, hybrid and mobile web apps on iOS and Android.
    - Uses WD protocol.
- Katalon, SeleniumBase, etc.
    - Other tools use the Selenium WD under the hood.
    - E.g., Katalon uses the Selenium jar file in the back-end, but it still comminicates to the browsers via the web DevTools protocol.
 


----

### DevTools Overview

- Tools to test and debug code for web developers.
- When you develop a web app in an IDE, you are able to step through the code. But what if you want to debug the UI part of it? Let’s say you want to check the look and feel, e.g., verify that the correct styles were applied.
- This is where the DevTools come into play. They are integrated into all modern-day browsers, such as Chrome, Edge, Safari and Firefox.
- You can use DevTools to verify how your web app looks. I.e., you can view the HTML and DOM structure at a very high level and then drill down into details as required.
<img src="https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/2f481d75-8c32-4967-96e1-aa17bf8e5a68" width=680>

----

#### CDP Definition

Need for protocol:
- Automation support
- Extended debuggability
- Consistency

Why do we need this protocol in the first place? It’s in the browser, the browser understands everything. Why do we need a protocol?

Essentially, the need for a protocol arises in the context of a contract between two parties which communicate with each other. Any entity can act as such a party to the contract. The parties need to be aware of the common shared semantics, what response they receive, as well as the format of the response. The receiver can understand the content they receive, and vice versa - the receiver responds back to the sender, and the sender can interpret what they receive. This forms the foundation of any global protocol that exists.

CDP exists to provide the capacity to communicate between the DevTools and the browser, and vice versa.
E.g.: You have a Chrome browser. It has all the information about any event that happens – when DOM is loaded, network requests are being fired, or even performance-related information, when we download a resource or get more resources. But the browser needs to pipe this information through, to communicate it to the DevTools interface, so that we can actually verify that it’s there. This communication between the browser and the DevTools happens using CDP. It’s a common language they both understand. 

That’s why we need a Protocol. It provides consistency for all Chromium-based browsers, like Edge or Chrome – they understand CDP and know how to work with it. And hence the browsers have the DevTools window available. 

Additionally, since CDP is able to communicate with a browser driver - e.g., the Chrome Driver - the same protocol is used for the driver, which makes it easier to use it for automation purposes as well. Chrome driver is a binary that we use for testing purposes, which knows how to talk to the browser and drive it. 

#### CDP Structure

Concepts:
- Domains
- Commands
- Events

CDP is divided into Domains, Commands, and Events. In the OOP analogy, we have classes which group the related methods and properties together. Similarly, a Domain is a special logical grouping of all the Commands and Events that keeps them all in one place. That is how it’s structured.

Commands give instructions to the browser to do something. We give it a command, instruct it to perform a certain action, or instruct it to retrieve certain data.

An Event is a signal that something has happened in the system. Browsers are intrinsically even-driven in nature. When the DOM is loaded, there are lots of events that are fired, and the browser picks these up and uses this information in the DevTools window. DOM is just one example. The Protocol avails lots of events which the browser is driven by.

Domains, Commands, and Events are the three core concepts of CDP. 


#### Selenium CDP Support

![image](https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/d336cd7e-5f83-4077-b16d-358a30eb904b)

First, ChromeDriver is getting initialized. A simple session is created with the ChromeDriver.

        ChromeDriver driver = new ChromeDriver();

We get the DevTools instance (for later use).

        DevTools devTools = driver.getDevTools();

Then we create a session - that is our initial WebSocket handshake connection that is established. So when you do createSession, the WebSocket connection is established. And there are certain Domains, Events, and Commands that would need to be called for that handshake - that’s what happens in the background as part of it.

        devTools.createSession();

Later we move on to actually sending the commands. 
When we do devTools.send(), we are sending the command.

        devTools.send(
        Emulation.setGeolocationOverride(
        Optional.of(47.604653),
        Optional.of(-122.335461),
        Optional.of(1)));
        
        driver.get(“https://my-location.org/”);
        driver.quit();


#### CDP - Automation Tools

Playwright and Puppeteer use CDP to control Chromium-based browsers (Chrome, Edge, Opera) programmatically for web automation and testing purposes.

For example, in order to Click a button, WD Classic would identify the button element, move the mouse cursor over the element (it injects a mouse event) and perform the click action on that element. CDP simulates the analogous Click action on the button in a different way. CDP has a different implementation in the back-end, when we perform the Click action.

In short, CDP performs 3 actions in the back-end:

1. <code>DOM.performSearch</code> -- performs the search operation to identify the element
2. <code>DOM.querySelector</code> -- uses querySelect to select the element
3. <code>DOM.dispatchEvent</code> -- dispatches an event to simulate the Click action on that element

Here is a specific example of CDP implementation by Puppeteer:

    await page._client.send('DOM.performSearch', { query: buttonSelector });
    // id for search results
    await  page._client.send('DOM.performSearch', { query: ' ', searchId });
    await  page._client.send('Input.dispatchMouseEvent', { type: 'mousePressed', ... });
    await  page._client.send('Input.dispatchMouseEvent', { type: 'mouseReleased', ... });

----

### WD Classic vs CDP

In recent years, CDP has gained a lot of traction in the automation industry. Let's compare <code>WD Classic</code> and <code>CDP</code> side by side.

WD Classic | CDP |
---|---|
🔵 Standard protocol, supported by all browsers | 🔵 Supports only Chromium-based browsers |
🔴 Communicates via HTTP requests | 🔴 Communicates via WebSocket |
🟣 Does not support low-level controls | 🟣 Supports low-level controls |

🔵 WD Classic is a standard protocol designed according to the W3C specificiation.

🔵 CDP is a protocol, but it only supports Chromium-based browsers, such as Chrome and Edge.

🔴 WD Classic starts an HTTP server in the back-end and sends the commands to the browser driver. The driver carries these instructions on to the browser. Communication happens via the traditional HTTP response/request protocol.

🔴 CDP uses a WebSocket which is bidirectional in nature. WebSocket has the capacity to send the commands and concurrently listen to the events/messages from the server in real time.

🟣 WD Classic can perform operations in the browser UI, but cannot perform those operations in the DevTools console. It can't control the DevTools programmatically. We cannot access network requests, console components, errors or events that happen in the DevTools.

🟣 CDP has a the power of accessing the browser DevTools. It can get the messages or errors from the console, mock the network requests, or wait until the DOM changes.


#### WD Classic - Disadvantages:
- Synchronous Nature
    - WD commands are generally synchronous in nature. It means that the client sends and HTTP request and waits for a response from the browser server before proceeding to the next command.
    - E.g., if we want to click a button, first we need to vefify that the button is enabled and is clickable, and then perform the click action. To achieve this, WD sends 3 synchronous requests one-by-one in order to make sure that the element is 1) visible and 2) clickable, and 3) performs the click action.
    - Due to its synchronous nature, WD waits until an operation is processed on the server side -- this is a performance concern.
- Limited Low-Level DevTools Control
    - Some of the low-level DevTools controls, such as Performance Profiling, Network Interception, Advanced DOM Inspection, and JavaScript Console Interactions, are not available in WD Classic.
- Unidirectional Communication
    - WD Classic is slow because it lacks the BiDirectional communication with the browser. It means the users have to poll for element availability or visibility, which leads to delays in test automation.
    - Because WD Classic is synchronous and unidirectional, we can send a request and receive response messages for that request at a later time. But we can't actually know what's happening on the browser server side.

#### CDP - Disadvantages:
- Browser Compatibility - Chromium Only
    - This specific protocol is designed to be consistent only for the Chromium browsers. CDP doesn’t work with other browsers, like Safari and Firefox. Other browsers on the market have their own proprietary protocols and interfaces. Mozilla has done a great job at implementing a subset of CDP, but that is just for Puppeteer support. The support is rather incomplete, so anytime we are using Firefox, there’s a good chance things will break while using CDP, because of this partial half-baked support.
- Version-Specific Dependencies
    - CDP has a caveat - it’s specific to the Chrome browser version. For every Google Chrome version release, there is a respective new release of a CDP version. This might cause a breaking change. Certain features might get deprecated or modified, affecting backward compatibility. We might write our code today and send CDP commands via this code. A test script written for the current browser version might not work for a previous or future browser version. Let’s say we’re sending 4 parameters. And tomorrow with the new Chrome version it might require 5 parameters, and our code will break. It affects the durability. We don’t want the code to break, hence due to frequent Chrome releases, we'll have to deal with overhead.
- Lacks Accommodation for Automation Needs
    - And while CDP supports automation, it’s important to understand that it was not designed with automation in mind. It was designed to provide this physical DevTools experience. It doesn’t keep that need for common automation use cases. It doesn’t necessarily address that in a straightforward manner.


----

### WD BiDi - Advantages

Once we have a solid understanding of the WD Classic and CDP, it's easier to understand why BiDi was created and came into play.

At a certain point, Chromium developers wondered why shouldn't they merge both WD Classic and CDP tools into one protocol, so that they could utilize the power of both tools. That's how WD BiDi was born.

<img src="https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/0b1181b6-af35-4950-b678-33217172a02c" width=460>

WD BiDi is a cross-browser automation protocol. It's an open standard that works across browsers, fast by default, and comes packed with all the features you need for test automation. How? It takes the best of <code>Chrome DevTools Protocol</code> (e.g., fast bidirectional messaging & low level control) and <code>Classic WebDriver</code> (e.g., best x-browser support, W3C Standard, testing-oriented), and combines them into the extraordinary WebDriver BiDi protocol. The vision behind BiDi is to give you full flexibility and let you write tests using any of your favorite tools and automate them in any browser or driver.

This is certainly an exciting future for test automation. It takes a huge effort from various vendors working together to ensure this future.

Selenium, WebDriverIO, Puppeteer and Playwright have already introduced initial support for WebDriver BiDi.

One of the main features is Low Level Control. I.e., monitoring console messages to help verify the uncaught exceptions and intended logs. There's also full interoperability between WebDriver Classic and BiDi.

WD BiDi is undoubtedly the future of browser automation!
____

### WD BiDi Implementation Status

WD BiDi is still a work in progress, it's not been fully implemented yet. It's been under development for the past 2 years.

- WD BiDi specification is a WIP, supported by diverse collaborators, such as:
    - Browser Vendors: Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Safari
    - Open Source Automation Projects: Selenium, WebDriverIO
    - Companies offering Browser Automation Solutions: BrowserStack, SauceLabs.
- A few [modules](https://www.selenium.dev/documentation/webdriver/bidirectional/bidirectional_w3c/) have already been implemented for Selenium and WebDriverIO and can be used in automation scripts.


![image](https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/e205ab4d-a0b6-4775-a18b-d316ab0a1ca7)

Domains/Modules:
- <code>session/</code> - is a basic module where you can start a BiDi session
- <code>script/</code> - use this module to inject JS code when using WD BiDi
- <code>network/</code> - a module where you can perform network interception
- <code>log/</code> - can read actual console or JS logs
- <code>input/</code> - events that happen when, for example, you submit a form. WD BiDi supports input events such as the keyboard strokes you perform.
- <code>errors/</code> and - <code>browsing_context/</code> are high level modules

We can understand the content by examining the domain. When we open the <code>browsing_context/</code> module, we observer various sub-modules such as:
- <code>capture_screenshot/</code>
- <code>classic_interop/</code>
- <code>close/</code>
- <code>context-created/</code>
- <code>create/</code>
- <code>dom_content_loaded/</code>
- <code>fragment_navigated/</code>
- <code>get_tree/</code>
- <code>load/</code>
- <code>navigate/</code>
- <code>print/</code>
- <code>reload/</code>
- <code>set_viewport/</code>
We can capture a screenshot, open a new browser, close it, create a new tab/window, navigate to a URL, print pages, or save to PDF, etc.


![image](https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/3a498c85-59bd-4649-b357-ab65c8c0a4f7)


----

### WebDriver Bidi (BiDirectional) Protocol - Code Samples

#### Sample 1 - Register Basic Authentication - Java

Basic Authentication is a common way to safeguard your resources on the internet.
If you request something from the server, the request goes to the browser, the browser passes it to the server. The request is basically stating “I want authentication” and yields a dialogue box with username and password fields to fill. Once you enter the basic username and password, you’ll be able to easily access the resources. It’s a rather straightforward concept. 

We’ll use AUT: http://httpbin.org/basic-auth/foo/bar
It shows you a small prompt, a dialogue box asking for the username and password. When you enter username “foo” and password “bar”, you’ll get correctly authenticated.
    
    package.com.company.wdbidi;
    
    import org.junit.After;
    import org.junit.Before;
    import org.junit.Test;
    import org.openqa.selenium.HasAuthentication;
    import org.openqa.selenium.UsernameAndPassword;
    import org.openqa.selenium.chrome.ChromeDriver;
    import org.openqa.selenium.chrome.ChromeOptions;
    import org.openqa.selenium.devtools.DevTools;
    import java.net.URI;
    import java.util.function.Predicate;
    import static org.assert().core.api.Assertions.assertThat;
    
    public class RegisterBasicAuthTest {
    
      private ChromeDriver chromedriver = null;
    
      @Before
      public void setup() {
        ChromeOptions chromeOptions = new ChromeOptions();
        chromeDriver = new ChromeDriver(ChromeOptions);
        DevTools devTools = chromeDriver.getDevTools();
        devTools.createSession();
      }
    
      @After
      public void cleanup() {
      chromeDriver.quit();
      }
    
      @Test
      public void registerBasicAuthTest() throws InterruptedException {
      Predicate<URI> uriPredicate = uri -> uri.getHost().contains(“httpbin.org”);
    	
      ((HasAuthentication) chromeDriver).register(uriPredicate, UsernameAndPassword.of(“foo”, “bar”));
      chromeDriver.get(“http://httpbin.org/basic-auth/foo/bar”);
    
      Thread.sleep(5000);
    
      String pageSource = chromeDriver.getPageSource();
    
      assertThat(pageSource.contains(“authenticated”)).isTrue();
      }
    }

____

References:
- https://developer.chrome.com/articles/webdriver-bidi/

Commit message:

BiDi - Road to Better Automation

README.md, after:

[UNDER CONSTRUCTION]


# Selenium WebDriver BiDi (WD BiDi) - BlackOps-Flavored Codified DevTools - Kismet Child of WebDriver Classic (WD Classic) and Chrome DevTools Protocol (CDP)

### Evolution of WD Classic
### Evolution of CDP
### WD Classic vs CDP
### WD BiDi and Its Advantages
### WD BiDi Implementation Status
### BiDi API Code Samples

----

### Evolution of WD Classic

WD Classic was created in 2005. It's been a 18+ year long journey.

#### WD Classic - History:

2004 -- Selenium RC
- Jason Huggins introduces the fist automation tool in 2004. RC worked by installing a remote control server in the browser machines. It sent a command to a JS engine called Selenium Core. And the Selenium Core, residing in the browser engine, executed that command. RC used to be quite popular, but came to a disadvantage because of its complex architecture. Moreover, its API was not purely object oriented.

2005 -- WebDriver
- Simon Stewart introduces the WedDriver protocol in 2005. The driver communicates to browsers via JSON wire protocol WD API.

2009 -- Selenium WebDriver
- Selenium and WebDriver merge into a new tool called Selenium WebDriver. JSON wire protocol is still used to communicate with the browsers.

2018 -- WD becomes a W3C standard
- W3C makes WD a standard specification. Now, Selenium WD communicates with the browsers via the W3C protocol, not JSON wire. Selenium v4 and other tools that use WD communicate via W3C protocol.
- The protocol was introduced to provide consistency and stability for test cases when using the WD.

#### WD Classic - Automation Tools:
- Selenium WD
    - Open-source suite of tools (ecosystem) for automating web apps.
    - Used for testing and simulating user interactions in the browsers.
- WebDriverIO
    - A test automation tool for web apps.
    - Offers a simple syntax and built-in commands.
    - Supports multiple browsers and devices for efficient and effective testing.
- NightWatchJS
    - An automated testing tool based on Node.js.
    - Offers a simple syntax and built-in WD support.
    - Supports E2E testing and browser automation.
- Appium
    - Open-source ecosystem for mobile automation.
    - Allows testing of native, hybrid and mobile web apps on iOS and Android.
    - Uses WD protocol.
- Katalon, SeleniumBase, etc.
    - Other tools use the Selenium WD under the hood.
    - E.g., Katalon uses the Selenium jar file in the back-end, but it still comminicates to the browsers via the web DevTools protocol.
 

----

### Evolution of CDP


#### DevTools Overview

- Tools to test and debug code for web developers.
- When you develop a web app in an IDE, you are able to step through the code. But what if you want to debug the UI part of it? Let’s say you want to check the look and feel, e.g., verify that the correct styles were applied.
- This is where the DevTools come into play. They are integrated into all modern-day browsers, such as Chrome, Edge, Safari and Firefox.
- You can use DevTools to verify how your web app looks. I.e., you can view the HTML and DOM structure at a very high level and then drill down into details as required.
<img src="https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/2f481d75-8c32-4967-96e1-aa17bf8e5a68" width=680>


#### CDP Definition

Need for protocol:
- Automation support
- Extended debuggability
- Consistency

Why do we need this protocol in the first place? It’s in the browser, the browser understands everything. Why do we need a protocol?

Essentially, the need for a protocol arises in the context of a contract between two parties which communicate with each other. Any entity can act as such a party to the contract. The parties need to be aware of the common shared semantics, what response they receive, as well as the format of the response. The receiver can understand the content they receive, and vice versa - the receiver responds back to the sender, and the sender can interpret what they receive. This forms the foundation of any global protocol that exists.

CDP exists to provide the capacity to communicate between the DevTools and the browser, and vice versa.
E.g.: You have a Chrome browser. It has all the information about any event that happens – when DOM is loaded, network requests are being fired, or even performance-related information, when we download a resource or get more resources. But the browser needs to pipe this information through, to communicate it to the DevTools interface, so that we can actually verify that it’s there. This communication between the browser and the DevTools happens using CDP. It’s a common language they both understand. 

That’s why we need a Protocol. It provides consistency for all Chromium-based browsers, like Edge or Chrome – they understand CDP and know how to work with it. And hence the browsers have the DevTools window available. 

Additionally, since CDP is able to communicate with a browser driver - e.g., the Chrome Driver - the same protocol is used for the driver, which makes it easier to use it for automation purposes as well. Chrome driver is a binary that we use for testing purposes, which knows how to talk to the browser and drive it. 


#### CDP Structure

Concepts:
- Domains
- Commands
- Events

CDP is divided into Domains, Commands, and Events. In the OOP analogy, we have classes which group the related methods and properties together. Similarly, a Domain is a special logical grouping of all the Commands and Events that keeps them all in one place. That is how it’s structured.

Commands give instructions to the browser to do something. We give it a command, instruct it to perform a certain action, or instruct it to retrieve certain data.

An Event is a signal that something has happened in the system. Browsers are intrinsically even-driven in nature. When the DOM is loaded, there are lots of events that are fired, and the browser picks these up and uses this information in the DevTools window. DOM is just one example. The Protocol avails lots of events which the browser is driven by.

Domains, Commands, and Events are the three core concepts of CDP. 


#### Selenium CDP Support

![image](https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/d336cd7e-5f83-4077-b16d-358a30eb904b)

First, ChromeDriver is getting initialized. A simple session is created with the ChromeDriver.

        ChromeDriver driver = new ChromeDriver();

We get the DevTools instance (for later use).

        DevTools devTools = driver.getDevTools();

Then we create a session - that is our initial WebSocket handshake connection that is established. So when you do createSession, the WebSocket connection is established. And there are certain Domains, Events, and Commands that would need to be called for that handshake - that’s what happens in the background as part of it.

        devTools.createSession();

Later we move on to actually sending the commands. 
When we do devTools.send(), we are sending the command.

        devTools.send(
        Emulation.setGeolocationOverride(
        Optional.of(47.604653),
        Optional.of(-122.335461),
        Optional.of(1)));
        
        driver.get(“https://my-location.org/”);
        driver.quit();


#### CDP - Automation Tools

Playwright and Puppeteer use CDP to control Chromium-based browsers (Chrome, Edge, Opera) programmatically for web automation and testing purposes.

For example, in order to Click a button, WD Classic would identify the button element, move the mouse cursor over the element (it injects a mouse event) and perform the click action on that element. CDP simulates the analogous Click action on the button in a different way. CDP has a different implementation in the back-end, when we perform the Click action.

In short, CDP performs 3 actions in the back-end:

1. <code>DOM.performSearch</code> -- performs the search operation to identify the element
2. <code>DOM.querySelector</code> -- uses querySelect to select the element
3. <code>DOM.dispatchEvent</code> -- dispatches an event to simulate the Click action on that element

Here is a specific example of CDP implementation by Puppeteer:

    await page._client.send('DOM.performSearch', { query: buttonSelector });
    // id for search results
    await  page._client.send('DOM.performSearch', { query: ' ', searchId });
    await  page._client.send('Input.dispatchMouseEvent', { type: 'mousePressed', ... });
    await  page._client.send('Input.dispatchMouseEvent', { type: 'mouseReleased', ... });

----

### WD Classic vs CDP

In recent years, CDP has gained a lot of traction in the automation industry. Let's compare <code>WD Classic</code> and <code>CDP</code> side by side.

WD Classic | CDP |
---|---|
🔵 Standard protocol, supported by all browsers | 🔵 Supports only Chromium-based browsers |
🔴 Communicates via HTTP requests | 🔴 Communicates via WebSocket |
🟣 Does not support low-level controls | 🟣 Supports low-level controls |

🔵 WD Classic is a standard protocol designed according to the W3C specificiation.

🔵 CDP is a protocol, but it only supports Chromium-based browsers, such as Chrome and Edge.

🔴 WD Classic starts an HTTP server in the back-end and sends the commands to the browser driver. The driver carries these instructions on to the browser. Communication happens via the traditional HTTP response/request protocol.

🔴 CDP uses a WebSocket which is bidirectional in nature. WebSocket has the capacity to send the commands and concurrently listen to the events/messages from the server in real time.

🟣 WD Classic can perform operations in the browser UI, but cannot perform those operations in the DevTools console. It can't control the DevTools programmatically. We cannot access network requests, console components, errors or events that happen in the DevTools.

🟣 CDP has a the power of accessing the browser DevTools. It can get the messages or errors from the console, mock the network requests, or wait until the DOM changes.


#### WD Classic - Disadvantages:
- Synchronous Nature
    - WD commands are generally synchronous in nature. It means that the client sends and HTTP request and waits for a response from the browser server before proceeding to the next command.
    - E.g., if we want to click a button, first we need to vefify that the button is enabled and is clickable, and then perform the click action. To achieve this, WD sends 3 synchronous requests one-by-one in order to make sure that the element is 1) visible and 2) clickable, and 3) performs the click action.
    - Due to its synchronous nature, WD waits until an operation is processed on the server side -- this is a performance concern.
- Limited Low-Level DevTools Control
    - Some of the low-level DevTools controls, such as Performance Profiling, Network Interception, Advanced DOM Inspection, and JavaScript Console Interactions, are not available in WD Classic.
- Unidirectional Communication
    - WD Classic is slow because it lacks the BiDirectional communication with the browser. It means the users have to poll for element availability or visibility, which leads to delays in test automation.
    - Because WD Classic is synchronous and unidirectional, we can send a request and receive response messages for that request at a later time. But we can't actually know what's happening on the browser server side.

#### CDP - Disadvantages:
- Browser Compatibility - Chromium Only
    - This specific protocol is designed to be consistent only for the Chromium browsers. CDP doesn’t work with other browsers, like Safari and Firefox. Other browsers on the market have their own proprietary protocols and interfaces. Mozilla has done a great job at implementing a subset of CDP, but that is just for Puppeteer support. The support is rather incomplete, so anytime we are using Firefox, there’s a good chance things will break while using CDP, because of this partial half-baked support.
- Version-Specific Dependencies
    - CDP has a caveat - it’s specific to the Chrome browser version. For every Google Chrome version release, there is a respective new release of a CDP version. This might cause a breaking change. Certain features might get deprecated or modified, affecting backward compatibility. We might write our code today and send CDP commands via this code. A test script written for the current browser version might not work for a previous or future browser version. Let’s say we’re sending 4 parameters. And tomorrow with the new Chrome version it might require 5 parameters, and our code will break. It affects the durability. We don’t want the code to break, hence due to frequent Chrome releases, we'll have to deal with overhead.
- Lacks Accommodation for Automation Needs
    - And while CDP supports automation, it’s important to understand that it was not designed with automation in mind. It was designed to provide this physical DevTools experience. It doesn’t keep that need for common automation use cases. It doesn’t necessarily address that in a straightforward manner.


----

### WD BiDi - Advantages

Once we have a solid understanding of the WD Classic and CDP, it's easier to understand why BiDi was created and came into play. At a certain point, Chromium developers wondered why shouldn't they merge both WD Classic and CDP tools into one protocol, so that they could utilize the power of both tools. That's how WD BiDi was born.

<img src="https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/0b1181b6-af35-4950-b678-33217172a02c" width=460>

#### BiDi - Road to Better Automation

Why BiDi?
- Standardized approach
- Not specific to browser versions
- Created with automation scenarios in mind
- Complementary to WD protocol, with an option to only have the BiDi connection.
- Low-level debugging capability
- Developed by leading browser vendors together, keeping browsers in mind

WD BiDi is a cross-browser automation protocol. It's an open standard that works across browsers, fast by default, and comes packed with all the features you need for test automation. How? It takes the best of <code>Chrome DevTools Protocol</code> (e.g., fast bidirectional messaging & low level control) and <code>Classic WebDriver</code> (e.g., best x-browser support, W3C Standard, testing-oriented), and combines them into the extraordinary WebDriver BiDi protocol. The vision behind BiDi is to give you full flexibility and let you write tests using any of your favorite tools and automate them in any browser or driver.

This is certainly an exciting future for test automation. It takes a huge effort from various vendors working together to ensure this future.

Selenium, WebDriverIO, Puppeteer and Playwright have already introduced initial support for WebDriver BiDi.

One of the main features is Low Level Control. I.e., monitoring console messages to help verify the uncaught exceptions and intended logs. There's also full interoperability between WebDriver Classic and BiDi.

WD BiDi is undoubtedly the future of browser automation!
____

### WD BiDi Implementation Status

WD BiDi is still a work in progress, it's not been fully implemented yet. It's been under development for the past 2 years.

- WD BiDi specification is a WIP, supported by diverse collaborators, such as:
    - Browser Vendors: Chrome, Edge, Firefox, Safari
    - Open Source Automation Projects: Selenium, WebDriverIO
    - Companies offering Browser Automation Solutions: BrowserStack, SauceLabs.
- A few [modules](https://www.selenium.dev/documentation/webdriver/bidirectional/bidirectional_w3c/) have already been implemented for Selenium and WebDriverIO and can be used in automation scripts.


![image](https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/e205ab4d-a0b6-4775-a18b-d316ab0a1ca7)

Domains/Modules:
- <code>session/</code> - is a basic module where you can start a BiDi session
- <code>script/</code> - use this module to inject JS code when using WD BiDi
- <code>network/</code> - a module where you can perform network interception
- <code>log/</code> - can read actual console or JS logs
- <code>input/</code> - events that happen when, for example, you submit a form. WD BiDi supports input events such as the keyboard strokes you perform.
- <code>errors/</code> and - <code>browsing_context/</code> are high level modules

We can understand the content by examining the domain. When we open the <code>browsing_context/</code> module, we observer various sub-modules such as:
- <code>capture_screenshot/</code>
- <code>classic_interop/</code>
- <code>close/</code>
- <code>context-created/</code>
- <code>create/</code>
- <code>dom_content_loaded/</code>
- <code>fragment_navigated/</code>
- <code>get_tree/</code>
- <code>load/</code>
- <code>navigate/</code>
- <code>print/</code>
- <code>reload/</code>
- <code>set_viewport/</code>
We can capture a screenshot, open a new browser, close it, create a new tab/window, navigate to a URL, print pages, or save to PDF, etc.


![image](https://github.com/lana-20/selenium-webdriver-bidi/assets/70295997/3a498c85-59bd-4649-b357-ab65c8c0a4f7)


----

### WebDriver Bidi (BiDirectional) Protocol - Code Samples

#### Sample 1 - Register Basic Authentication - Java

Basic Authentication is a common way to safeguard your resources on the internet.
If you request something from the server, the request goes to the browser, the browser passes it to the server. The request is basically stating “I want authentication” and yields a dialogue box with username and password fields to fill. Once you enter the basic username and password, you’ll be able to easily access the resources. It’s a rather straightforward concept. 

We’ll use AUT: http://httpbin.org/basic-auth/foo/bar
It shows you a small prompt, a dialogue box asking for the username and password. When you enter username “foo” and password “bar”, you’ll get correctly authenticated.
    
    package.com.company.wdbidi;
    
    import org.junit.After;
    import org.junit.Before;
    import org.junit.Test;
    import org.openqa.selenium.HasAuthentication;
    import org.openqa.selenium.UsernameAndPassword;
    import org.openqa.selenium.chrome.ChromeDriver;
    import org.openqa.selenium.chrome.ChromeOptions;
    import org.openqa.selenium.devtools.DevTools;
    import java.net.URI;
    import java.util.function.Predicate;
    import static org.assert().core.api.Assertions.assertThat;
    
    public class RegisterBasicAuthTest {
    
      private ChromeDriver chromedriver = null;
    
      @Before
      public void setup() {
        ChromeOptions chromeOptions = new ChromeOptions();
        chromeDriver = new ChromeDriver(ChromeOptions);
        DevTools devTools = chromeDriver.getDevTools();
        devTools.createSession();
      }
    
      @After
      public void cleanup() {
      chromeDriver.quit();
      }
    
      @Test
      public void registerBasicAuthTest() throws InterruptedException {
      Predicate<URI> uriPredicate = uri -> uri.getHost().contains(“httpbin.org”);
    	
      ((HasAuthentication) chromeDriver).register(uriPredicate, UsernameAndPassword.of(“foo”, “bar”));
      chromeDriver.get(“http://httpbin.org/basic-auth/foo/bar”);
    
      Thread.sleep(5000);
    
      String pageSource = chromeDriver.getPageSource();
    
      assertThat(pageSource.contains(“authenticated”)).isTrue();
      }
    }

____

References:
- https://developer.chrome.com/articles/webdriver-bidi/
